back of it to talk about for-profit
subsidiaries other interlocking
not-for-profits that they might be
involved with like a home health agency
or a nursing home and those are and then
when you get the for-profit corporation
records you can go back to your state
corporation records and cross-check it
and find out what that company set up to
do so that's at least a start to get out
what they're doing thank you very much
this is c-span 2 coverage from a panel
discussion held this past week by the
National Press Club and a group known as
investigative reporters and editors the
keynote speech to this gathering was
delivered by Ray Bonner an author and
journalist we now bring you our coverage
of that speech good afternoon and
welcome to the National Press Club my
name is Greg Spears and I'm president
the National Press Club and Washington
correspondent for knight-ridder
newspapers
I'd like to welcome you to the first
joint seminar of investigative reporters
and editors and the National Press Club
founded in 1975 Ayari is the leading
educational organization for journalists
the Press Club which was founded in 1908
is one of the world's leading news
forums before introducing the guest in
our head table I'd like to remind you in
the audience today that if you have any
questions for our speaker please go to
the mics which are located on the floor
and ask them and please do ask them from
the mic sociis Bank and pick up your
questions I'd like now to introduce our
head table guests and ask them to please
stand briefly when their names are read
I also ask the audience withhold
applause until I've read all their names
starting at my left and your right
Allen's line bureau chief of the sly
news bureau Dave Martin of the
Harrisburg patriot-news Jim Neff author
of mobbed-up Jacquie pressors high wire
life in the Teamsters and a director of
the IRA Judy Miller weekend editor and
assistant city editor of the Miami
Herald and an IRA director Hank
Ryan whdh-tv Boston and an IRA director
Larry Lippmann the Washington bureau
chief of the Palm Beach Post skipping
over our speaker for the moment Jonathan
Selanne of Syracuse newspapers and the
chairman of the National Press Club
speakers committee Sonja Hill grynn
Washington editor of
farm journal and a member of the Board
of Governors of the National Press Club
jockey Koscheck of the Fort Worth
star-telegram
Christopher Roche of Scripps League
newspapers and olive Talley of the
Dallas Morning News and a director of
IRA our luncheon speaker today has been
a journalist for just over a dozen years
but has seen more and done more than
most reporters do in a lifetime
Raymond Bonnar a former reporter for the
New York Times and for The New Yorker
magazine got his start in journalism at
age 37 when he picked up and moved to
Central America in 1980 he gave up a law
career which included stints with Ralph
Nader's public citizen litigation group
and the San Francisco District
Attorney's Office and instead of the
courtroom he pulled into Central America
just in time for a Bolivian election
that became a coup a year later he was
working for The Times in El Salvador and
spent the next three years reporting for
the paper primarily in Central America
his book on the region weakness and
deceit US policy in El Salvador received
the Robert F Kennedy Book Award in 1985
however mr. Bonners reporting in El
Salvador also got him into trouble
with both the Reagan administration and
his bosses at the Times in 1982 he and a
Washington Post reporter Elma Guillermo
Prieto both wrote at about an alleged
massacre in the village of el mozote a
supposedly carried out by an elite El
Salvadoran military unit trained by the
United States the stories appeared a day
before President Reagan told Congress
that the El Salvadoran ruling junta
was making quote a concerted and
significant effort to comply with
internationally recognized human rights
and continuing mr. Reagan's quote was
achieving substantial control over all
elements of its own Armed Forces
Assistant Secretary of State Thomas
Enders told Congress that US officials
had found no evidence of the massacre
mr. bonner reported upon u.s. embassy of
banned him from briefings and denigrated
him before other reporters right wing
commentators criticized his reporting
the New York Times recalled him to New
York and put him on the business desk in
1982 he later took a leave of absence
and resigned from The Times well now as
Paul Harvey would say here's the rest of
the story on its front page on October
22nd the New York Times reported the
following Elmo Elmo's ot El Salvador in
a small rectangular plot among the
overgrown ruins of a village here a team
of forensic archaeologists has opened a
window on El Salvador's nightmarish past
near Alette nearly 11 years after
American trained soldiers were said to
have torn through el mozote se and
surrounding Hamlet's on a rampage in
width in which at least 794 people were
killed the bones have emerged as stark
evidence that the claims of peasant
survivors and the reports of a couple of
American journalists were true on behalf
of the National Press Club and
investigative reporters and editors it
is my pleasure to welcome Raymond Bonnar
[Music]
[Applause]
thank you hmm it's a real honor to be
here to have been asked to speak
I think the summary you've heard
probably some as I was listening to it
in part I thought well we could probably
go right to the questions as I can
imagine what they would be saved me from
doing some summary speaking of the front
page I got this note it may have been
the most satisfying correction on the
record on the front page of the good
grey lady in years that was from the
great bill Kovac was at the New York
Times and should still be there in my
view this note Galileo and Bonner still
write after all these years from John
Kipner I got a lot of messages after the
front page stories in The Times and in
the Washington Post and I suppose the
one that in many ways sticks with me and
has the most relevance for this group
came from one of this town's premier
investigative journalists and deservedly
so
and he said congratulations it was nice
to see the stories and then he said and
this is a direct quote that I'll never
forget I never knew what to make of the
charges and counter-charges at the time
and I thought boy if this guy and he is
really a premier investigative
journalist if this person had doubt at
the time about the charges and the
counter charges what does that say about
the state of investigative journalism
and I don't say that meaning that what I
wrote an Almond wrote should have been
taken as the gospel or is the final and
absolute truth but for this person to
have basically said that he was giving
as much credence to the government
denials
I find the most intriguing and also
perhaps the most troubling so what does
it say about investigative journalism
perhaps it's this note from John Kreutz
and another former everybody seems to be
a former New York Times correspondent
now with the Chicago Tribune and also a
terrific investigative reporter and he
wrote the whole episode ought to stand
as a monument to the utter failure of
the press during the Reagan era and now
we're course moving on to the Clinton
era before we do that however let me
give you just a little more background
perhaps on almost saut and what
happened we've had the short version now
I'll give you the New Yorker or the old
New Yorker version there was a I'm
reminded in doing so also at once
hearing senator Harkin speak to a group
of for the lawyers Committee for Human
Rights to a fundraising dinner to a
group of young lawyers and he was
talking about how when he'd been a
congressional aide he discovered the
tiger cages in Vietnam and as I looked
around the audience I realized most of
people he was speaking to didn't know
very much about Vietnam other than from
history they were too young to have
lived through it and as I look around
this group I realized that you're
younger or I'm older and that many of
you may not have understandably not have
lived through the Central America sagas
and certainly not the specifics of elma
sotae I'm also interested I this letter
to the editor after Newsweek wrote a
column an article on the el mozote a
recently a woman wrote from Sunnyvale
California your article on the el mozote
a massacre of 1981 horrified me I am
appalled the US officials would flatly
deny that nearly eight hundred people
were killed in this village and that the
ignoring problems like this won't make
them go away let me tell you something
about what happened and if this woman
was appalled perhaps I should give you
some more details about the denial
in terms of what happened let me I just
found this this morning again more
contemporary account of what did happen
in front of one hovel lay a blue knit
infants bonnet near a plastic baby
bottle inside among the ruins skeletons
of two bodies were discernible along
with the jumble of bones from an
undetermined number of others possibly
members of the same family or maybe just
friends down the mountain trail a short
distance twelve recently cut 12-foot
planks ten inches by 3/8 of an inch were
propped against the trees on the patio
of the Adobe Hut the saws machetes in
crude homemade hammers were stained with
drops of blood inside five skulls were
strewn among the smashed tiles the men
had been carpenters a couple of hundred
yards away on the other side of some
beehives the loan personally partially
burned body of a man who appeared to be
about 40 years old was sprawled on the
dirt floor his had a few feet from the
family's altar on which rested three
crudely framed religious pictures torn
from a magazine one of Mary and the
Christ child
another of Christ on the cross brown
beans from a ruptured white bag had
spilled under his torso at the edge of a
cornfield under the green leaves of the
banana trees was a pile of 14 bodies
infants and men and women in their teens
and early 20s horrified disbelief was
reflected in their wide eyes and gaping
mouths and the heap was a child perhaps
five years old there was a month's old
infant wrapped securely around the
buttocks and a clean back cotton bath
towel as if he or she were being carried
perhaps by the facedown woman in plastic
sandals the earth was littered with
spent m16 automatic rifle cartridges the
victims were members of an evangelist
group and had gathered in a house for
protection the house was shambles
mama they're killing me they've killed
my sister they're going to kill me
scream the nine-year-old son of Rufina
Amaya she was one who had managed to
escape but in addition to her son
somewhere along the ruins in Lesotho
were the skeletons of her blind husband
and three daughters ages 3-5 years and
eight months while the villages were
being herded together
mrs. Amaya had slipped away from her
hiding place in the tree she heard the
soldiers conversation lieutenant
somebody here says he won't kill the
children said one soldier who's the son
of a [ __ ] who said that the lieutenant
answered I'm going to kill him this is a
Maya recalled the soldiers had no fury
they just observed the lieutenant's
orders they were cold it wasn't a battle
later I met a man's Cesar Martinez it
was 46 years old he had been told by the
guerrillas to leave the area because the
army was sweeping through but he'd
stayed the soil he fled but the soldiers
killed his mother and sister and his
sisters two children ages five and eight
sitting next to Martinez on a rope bed
as we talked was 15 year old Julio and
we'd been in a gully when the shooting
started in his village the soldiers
killed his mother father nine-year-old
brother and two sisters ages 7 and 5
Giulio had returned to the village to
bury his family and two of his friends
ages 7 and 10 in Cerro pondo the toll of
149 included 24-year old rose Aldo
Araneta who was pregnant one month old
Jeremiah Arg Wetty and 10 men and women
in their 70s and 80s guaca Maya the
soldiers went house-to-house house to
house killing tiny infants and old
people they hold ten villagers to the
church where they executed them
this Greg said the US government denied
this ever happened
the American ambassador at the time
Dean Hinton said he did not quote have
any reason to believe the reports are
true none of the tested sources
available to the embassy has given us
even a hint of massive civilian
casualties Thomas Enders Assistant
Secretary of State for Latin America
went before Congress a few days later
and said quote there is no evidence to
confirm that government forces
systematically massacred civilians in
the operation zone or that the number of
civilians even remotely approached the
733 or 926 victims cited in the press he
said in fact there were probably not
more than 300 people living in the
village that was the beginning I suppose
of the cover-up that went on and until
this last November when stories started
coming out by the way I was there not
only with I mean I was not there with
Alma Alma was working for The Washington
Post and I was working for the New York
Times and she reminded me I had
forgotten this that when I was going in
I had called her this was a journalistic
full pot at best and said listen I'm
going in with the guerrillas she didn't
like the idea at all and immediately
arranged to go in also I was as well
with suit and then and then Alma was a
very different addition to being a
terrific writer and journalist Alma was
in there after came in afterwards I had
gone in with Susan my Salas the
justifiably acclaimed photographer and
Susan shot pictures of the massacre some
of which are in the Columbia Journalism
Review article recently and Alma
smuggled out the hand-wrote I learned
this later of course in longhand on a
piece of paper and had it taken out and
then filed to the Washington Post
it was totally coincidental that the New
York Times stories in The Washington
Post stories appeared on the same day
now when when bill Dedmon asked me to
speak on mr. Tay he said speak about you
know what happened the effect on you
personally what it means for foreign
policy and so on but I don't I don't
think what it meant for me personally is
particularly important but I think what
it means for journalism an investigative
journalist is very important it had a
definite chilling effect on the
reporting in sent from Central America
even general Nutting who was the senior
American military commander at the time
said that the reporting turned around
after the attacks on Alma and on main
the attacks were led actually by the
Wall Street Journal's editorial board as
ralph said yesterday some masochist of
us who read it the schizophrenic Wall
Street Journal is he also said because
their reporting is so superb the journal
that dedicated the entire column
editorial thing was not one of these
days where they were going to split it
half in half I got the whole column
media's war was called and as Alma said
its they attacked me because I was with
the New York Times and the power of the
New York Times on a story like this was
more apparently they felt in The
Washington Post the column raised Sydney
schanberg from Cambodia and his
reporting David Halberstam his reporting
from Vietnam and essentially message was
and now ray Bonner is going to do in
Central America I he delivered to the
Communists just like schanberg and
Halberstam did Vietnam and Cambodia
there were many colleagues who thought
it was a nice honor and of course there
was that I won't deny it but there were
also costs and there were cost for
journalism and the coverage of Central
America remember one reporter coming up
to me and saying she'd gotten a note
from her editor with the Wall Street
Journal editorial saying don't let this
happen to us another reporter said to me
colleague at the paper who was in
Central America after I was I'm not
gonna let this happen to me it did have
a chilling effect it is tough day after
day after day after day to write against
the wind there were many times I found
it difficult to continue to write
stories about human rights abuses about
killings about massacres of peasants but
I don't know what you do when the
government keeps contending as it did
during the during this Central America
during El Salvador and Nicaragua and
keeps repeating it over and over again
in the case of El Salvador that the
human rights situation was improving and
Duarte and the military were really
reformist in
etc etc and these human rights abuses
aren't occurring and peasants aren't
really being killed and besides we don't
know who's doing it and what about the
left or in the case of Nicaragua and
they keep repeating over and over and
over and over again that the Sandinistas
are communists and if we don't stop them
in Central America before we know it
they'll be all the way be all the way up
to the soft underbelly of Kansas yes Bob
white used to say it's tough as Ralph
said yesterday journalists aren't
supposed to crusade they're not supposed
to go on Crusades and we're not but
where is that line between continuing to
write the stories you see it and writing
the story that goes against what is
being said in Washington now seems to me
though to make have any value from the
Masotti and its aftermath I mean many
people have said to me in as most of
these notes and a lot of telephone calls
you must feel vindicated don't you feel
good about that
vindication vindication as I said to
somebody yesterday you know look
personally I I'm not sure it's that
important we're in this business we give
lumps and we take our lumps but he said
well maybe it's not important for you
personally but it's important for us as
journalists to see vindication like this
perhaps but I also think it's important
to try to draw if possible some larger
messages or some larger lessons I think
it's harder at first I think it's harder
with the cold war over I remember when I
think it was Newsweek somebody who
called me after the the front-page story
is saying that in fact this massacre had
occurred saying what does it mean I mean
what are the what's the lessons what do
we learned from it etc etc and I said to
him and I find it hard in the aftermath
of the Cold War but
because I don't think you will have
foreign policy driven by this this
blinding anti-communism not by
anti-communism but but the blinding
anti-communism I use the adjective
importantly because somebody pointed out
that George Will wrote a column in
Newsweek in which saying that I had said
Alger Hiss had been vindicated in the
vindication discredited anti-communism
yes Alger Hiss has been vindicated and
frankly for me that's that's important
vindication really significant
vindication but I never said that it
discredit in anti-communism it's the
blind anti-communism the rabbit
anti-communism the ideological
unyielding anti-communism that gets the
government to deny to lie to cover up
like they have in the Mossad take a sign
of the Mossad a case of course is not
the only and not even perhaps and
probably not even the most important but
it's the one I'm familiar with but is
the attack still continue I ran into Ken
Noble from the New York Times who was
going into Somalia and he came through
Nairobi where I was living up until
about 48 hours ago and Noble has been
writing out of Angola and he has been
getting letters from people
right-wingers conservative attacking him
for his reports about Jonas Savimbi
Jonas Savimbi remember the great
Democrat of the Reagan administration
the true democrat jonas savimbi who went
to an election and lost and now has
decided that he doesn't want to play by
the rules and is going back to war
I only degress for a second to ask what
would have happened if the Sandinistas
had done that after their election a few
years ago but ken is being attacked now
as he points out because the times have
changed certainly small tea and cap tea
as well it's probably not gonna have any
impact or significant impact on them at
least publicly because I don't think
anybody's gonna give much credence to
criticisms of Jonas Savimbi and in fact
Ken's reporting there's one who lives in
Africa and and therefore and now spends
a lot of time in Britain I can tell you
the British press when it comes to
writing about Jonas Savimbi and I mean
the responsible not the tabloid British
press but the really good British
newspapers are much tougher on Jonas
Savimbi than any American newspaper is
so the attacks I guess still continue
but where I really think we're gonna see
it and I guess is journalists some would
make a cautionary play and that's in
writing about the Middle East and Islam
and particularly Islamic fundamentalism
I think anybody who tries to put Islam
in some kind of a less than demonizing
light is going to be pretty severely
attacked most people view Muslims as
terrorists and so on I mean we saw a
case in some ways in course Peter Arnett
during the Gulf War
how his patriotism was questioned
because of his reporting from Baghdad
and I think that's probably where we're
going to see it see it next that there
was a book review about a book about
Islam in The Wall Street Journal
recently actually wasn't a book review
it was just a column saying that the
author of the book and it's a very
academic solid book was being
romanticizing about Islam
where else it's gonna come from in
foreign policy and that's what I tend to
write about more is foreign policy or
totally I don't know is it gonna be
different under Clinton since that's one
of the issues in this conference
covering Clinton no no maybe it won't be
as blatant hopefully it won't be quite
as ideologically driven but they're
gonna have their foreign policy secrets
their foreign policy goals and I think
maybe at first it's going to be tougher
for journalists to look behind them and
see what the true foreign policy agenda
is and I see there was a small blurb in
the paper in the post this morning about
Christopher meeting with
neoconservatives trying to assure him
that he's not going to sell out the
country I'm not sure who they were
worried now that he's gonna sell out the
country to since communism no longer
seems to be a big problem but it was the
meeting was with the people who during
the Reagan era in the Cold War of the
Reagan era were convinced that there was
a communist behind every revolution
behind every bit of unrest I often
thought that what newspapers should do
is for every reporter they have I
realized this as a luxury and not every
paper could do it but I think The Times
could and I think the post could both
the New York Times the Los Angeles Times
the bigger papers through every person
they have covering a beat like the State
Department or the Pentagon or the
Justice Department they should have
another reporter whose job is to look
behind what is being said publicly you
can't it's it's and I know the reporter
on the beat may not like that very much
but I think the the New York Times in
the post and other major papers have an
obligation to report what the government
is saying I know there there are a lot
of people on the
primarily on the left during the Reagan
years obviously who were angry because
they'd see the New York Times put on the
front page I remember when when Haig
during his brief period was popping off
about Central America and it would lead
the New York Times they'd be furious you
know why are they why are they giving
credence to him why are they letting him
say these things why are they putting it
on the front page etc I'll tell you when
I wrote my book about Central America I
was I was awfully glad that the New York
Times had reported all those things
because it made it easier for me to then
point out the discrepancies between what
was being said officially and what the
truth was
so I think you need that and you need
somebody at the Pentagon writing about
those things but I think just as much
you need somebody who goes there
and says all right now what what's
really going on what aren't they telling
us behind the briefings and I think that
would go a long way obviously the you
know healthy skepticism about government
pronouncements is needed I have to say
also I think sometimes the skepticism is
not healthy that we do become cynical
that we don't believe anything that the
government says in some place I suppose
we have to strike a balance I think I
don't think and to go back with the
opening it does bother me when people
who were investigative journalists do
say I didn't know what to make of the
charges in the counter charges at the
time basically saying I believe the
government when it says something like
this didn't happen eleven years later
it's now acknowledged that it did
although is alma and Susan both say it's
not really vindication because in fact
they never anything doubt all along
about what had happened so thank you
very much and I will be now happy to
entertain your questions
[Applause]
let me ask the first question while our
listeners are going to the microphones
at the on the ballroom floor to ask the
questions
why didn't other reporters confirm the
story of the massacre by going to mezzo
T well it wasn't that easy at the time I
mean you can't just get in your car and
drive up the Musante Susan and I had
gone in through Honduras waiting her
crossed rivers you know walking at night
never knowing when there might be an
ambush which we were very I can tell you
I was plenty scared so you couldn't you
couldn't really do it I mean by the time
they'd gotten in there there would have
been there would have been the evidence
wouldn't have been there we got in right
after while obviously from what I read
to you while the bodies were still there
I'm sigh her she believes not on the
saute but generally the one of the
problems is that other reporters don't
follow up when somebody else breaks a
story other reporters don't follow up I
think there's some legitimacy to that
perhaps but but in this case that that
doesn't explain it it was just it was
just hard to get to and I do think also
that I mean when the attacks started
they were pretty they were pretty
vicious I mean The Wall Street Journal
had that and then editing the Wall
Street Journal did that two or three
nights later the Wall Street Journal
editorial writer George Mellon was on
macneil-lehrer and with Sydney schanberg
Sydney schanberg was a columnist at the
New York Times at the time and was
interestingly about the only one who
came to my defense and wrote a column
called the can do Bombardier about Tom
Enders when Tom Enders had been in
Cambodia and when Tom Enders had tried
to cover up a bombing in which several
hundred people were killed and melon and
Schamberg appeared on McNiel Aaron melon
accused reporters of being Marxist and
having Marxist tendencies and Tim Berg
said well you know you can't brush the
whole press corps that way who are you
talking about and he said well ray
Bonner for one has a political
orientation so you know the the attacks
were pretty severe and
you know I know I these I'm just telling
you these things factually I'm not
elevating any of my role in any of this
at all and but and I think they did have
a chilling effect I mean I heard it from
other reporters and then I heard it
secondhand from people you know who
tried to who went down and did stories
about the press years later I mean
they're still writing they're still
writing about this in the impact I get a
call recently from some somebody in
California who's writing a book about
the press and this is being raised you
know those two those attacks do have it
do have an impact I'm not saying they
did turn anybody in this case ray in
connection with the government's
response to the reports on Mimoza day
you used the term cover-up so I assume
that you're taking the position that the
government was not just guilty of who
might say willful ignorance but also of
actively covering up its knowledge of
the massacre but that actually wasn't my
question
although if you wanted elaborate on that
that'd be great and my question actually
is something that's always troubled me
and I guess probably always will if
somehow we could unearth all of the
secret records and documents of the
defense and intelligence agencies from
those years have you ever wondered
whether it might not be possible that
the US government was not only complicit
in let's say covering up the activities
of the death squads but may have even
had some role in coordinating those
activities or may have been in some way
sponsoring them is that a possibility r
is that just too paranoid I think Allan
Nairn for one I know did a lot of
reporting and writing about that and I
think most of it appeared that
progressive but and it's certainly a
possibility you know I wouldn't say it's
being paranoid thinking that that's a
possibility and we certainly knew what
was going on or it's gross incompetence
as you say and I'm not sure you know in
Dantes hell I'm not sure which which
circle you would be in between gross
incompetence not knowing what happened
so thing and covering it up once you
once you found out there would be a
different degree as opposed to I don't
know on a moral level I know I'm not
sure if there would be any greater
degree of moral culpability if we're
allowed to engage in that moral
questions knowing what happened in
covering it up and continuing to fund I
mean we we knew what the Salvadoran army
was up to we knew what the Salvadoran
military was up to they knew about the
massacre my cell David if they don't
they are guilty of virtually almost
criminal gross negligence so did you
really make any difference in covering
it up and continuing to fund them or
being out there actually training them
and I don't think so the foreign policy
in fact was support to support the
Salvadoran government and to distort and
lie about what was going on in order to
continue doing so my name my name is
Elmer Sevilla Native American journalist
freelance and you touched on something
that I'm concerned about and that's
where is the line of crusading and
reporting and drawn we've had as you
know a number of massacres of our own
here in his country which were largely
ignored and when there's an attempt to
bring up the the facts and figures of
who was killed and who was massacred and
why frequently run into the stigma of
being a crusader you know why don't you
keep quiet you know that's what are you
on that crusade about so I'd like to
know your own experience about what
you've learned about where that line is
do we have a right or a moral obligation
to continue talking about those things
or should we back off because of that
I've never heard I've never heard
reporters saying they're on a crusade or
accused anyone of being on a crusade of
course it's always the editors and it's
basically a way of saying you know we
don't want any more of this story no I
don't think you back off obviously many
of you
there is a line I suppose if I had
continued to write 50 more stories about
Masato that didn't say anything else but
repeated the same thing over and over
again you know whether that was a
crusade or whatever would I think that
would not have been good journalism at
the same time what do you do when the
government came in then this is the
dilemma that I saw during the Reagan era
is when the government continues to
insist on something I mean how many
times can you write the story saying
essentially saying they're lying I mean
how many times can you keep writing it
they really have the advantage
I mean Elliott Abrams at the Human
Rights Bureau had the advantage because
he could every day say you know we find
that there's progress in El Salvador on
human rights and things are getting
better and this and that and he could
say at the same time the Sandinistas irv
a bunch of Communists and and so on and
so on how many times can you keep
writing the situation's not getting
better in El Salvador and Human Rights I
mean there is there is a problem I don't
know I don't know I don't know where the
answer is I don't I think it has it's on
a case-by-case basis but there is there
is a problem because the government has
the advantage the Press reports what the
government says and I think has an
obligation to although at some point I I
assume we don't we don't need to report
everything they say when they're saying
the same thing over and over again but
if you go back again on the most sumeria
with Central America you go back and
particularly I think it got worse in
Nicaragua the charges against the
Sandinistas over and over and over again
and what do you do if you're a
journalist down there and you see it
differently and it was very tough during
the Cold War because nobody wanted no
journalists wanted to be charged with
having lost putting aside for the moment
that it's ours to win or lose having
lost Central America to communism I mean
the 40s in the book in China who lost
China debate isn't that far removed
following up on it my name is Mary Beth
Sheridan from AP I was wondering if you
had any advice if any of us covers some
controversial Massacre or some similar
situation to the one you did on how to
write the story to protect yourself from
charges that you're biased or you know
using partial information or something
like that I mean is there any way to to
sort of write the story differently or
handle the whole controversy differently
I don't see how I mean I don't know and
and I guess my question be why should
you I mean you know you're a journalist
you you you're gonna write every story
with the same degree of whatever source
requirements they are whether it's about
a massacre or whether you're writing
about something in Washington DC or
wherever you know wherever you're based
why should why should there be a bigger
a different standard because they're
gonna come after you and there probably
is I mean I think there were at times
the New York Times cut got you know and
one of my stories I know after a while
they they they did get a little more
cautious in one I suppose maybe an
additional confirmation I don't think
that's the way it should be though I
don't just because you're gonna be
attacked and the story's going to be
attacked oh if you as a journalist
believe look I reported this to the same
degree that I report any story and I'm
confident about what I'm writing I think
that's enough your if its controversial
you're gonna be attacked anyhow I mean I
think all men I wrote our stories and I
can tell you they were carefully edited
and rightfully carefully edited I don't
mean censored at the New York Times
before it went into the paper there was
no other way to have written it in fact
we probably it turned out we put too
much caution in them well I mean let's
you know I mean we attribute you know
according to but there's no proof and
this can be denied etc it's you know the
usual cautionary stuff when in fact if
as we as we now know or as it's now been
confirmed as they say the massacres did
happen no I don't I don't think you
write it any oh you shouldn't write it
any differently thank you yes I'm
intrigued with the Wall Street Journal
editorial
attacking you did you ever discover a
paper trail as to who put whom up to
this and I don't think anybody had to
put the Wall Street Journal up to it I
don't think I don't think they gonna
find any conspiracy between the wall any
paper conspiracy between the Wall Street
Journal and the Reagan administration
and their views on Central America and
communism what was the date of that
electoral do you happen to remember that
February 10th 1982 okay
well I'm I'm interested in the the the
one newspaper attacking another
newspaper if if they need any
encouragement maybe maybe you argue that
they don't need any encouragement but
maybe there was I frankly I don't think
it makes a lot of difference if they had
if they were encouraged or they weren't
encouraged I mean they may I doubt if
they were encouraged
I mean look look there's a symbiotic
relationship between editorial boards
and government officials probably at all
newspapers yeah they talk to government
officials just like they talk to other
people I mean I'm sure I don't I don't
think it took a great deal you don't
think there's a story there yeah well I
suppose if
they're bloody interesting I mean it
would say an awful lot about The Wall
Street Journal I can tell you that I
mean I mean in think of it to think that
they needed the the Reagan
administration to put them up there this
would say something about The Wall
Street Journal which somehow I don't
think they needed it
I don't think they needed it but it
would be a good good good story I had a
question about your paper that you were
working for the time throughout all of
this
you mentioned the editing process that
goes into it and you know they were
happy enough and thought well enough the
story to put it on the front page and
what I haven't heard you talk about is
is the whole process that that turned
around and you being recalled and sent
to the business section that's pretty
good I think I got about 20 minutes
before that question
[Music]
I mean I was prepared for the question
and I knew I was gonna answer it and
I've been asking enough times although I
guess too many years on the African Sun
I've forgotten what the answer is look
as I said before my reporting did not
fit the tenor of the time small tea cap
tea if you want the New York Times
version I was green I was inexperienced
and they brought me back to New York to
give me some training legitimate I mean
I was green I'd like to think I was
young but unfortunately I wasn't but you
know the problem with that is I think I
should have been judged on on what I was
writing maybe that's a problem maybe I
was but I think I should have been
judgment when I was writing not on some
arbitrary criteria that I hadn't spent
an X number of months in in New York
[Music]
look Central America became the
ideological fault line at though at
those times first El Salvador and then
and then even more so Nicaragua the
executive editor and I had had different
views on Nicaragua intellectually
different views I thought I went to
Nicaragua from the background of El
Salvador and Guatemala and Nicaragua I
didn't see pregnant women with her belly
slit open I didn't see peasant heads
stuck on fence fence posts I didn't see
tortured mutilated bodies on dusty roads
executive better at the time went to
Nicaraguan he went from the background
of Eastern Europe and he saw a lot of
similarities and said to him I'd you
know I understand and maybe I should go
spend some time in Eastern Europe
but I mean that's that's essentially I
mean is where the differences were well
it wasn't only masata I mean it wasn't
the last story that I wrote that was
controversial at the time in those times
I mean miss OTA I think miss OTA was the
beginning of the end of my career at the
New York Times but then came the
election and I wrote several stories
saying that there were questions about
the number of people who had voted in
the election
I wrote a I wrote in a news analysis
that said you know the selection do you
for you those of you who remember there
was a great deal of euphoria because a
lot of people voted and there were about
700 or 800 journalists down there to
record it all and so on and there was
euphoria and I wrote a news analysis
that said you know there before you
simply isn't justified it's not gonna
end the war it's not gonna end up
fighting it was the only only I think
was about the only article I mean I can
say this honestly it was the only
article that was editorially changed
that I wrote from Central America and
they just it means basically what I said
was all in it but it was just pushed
down further then they had a they had a
different lead on obviously history
absolves me that election in 1982 was
hardly the you know we're just now
signing the peace agreement eleven years
later ten years later you know listen
I'm not the first person who's reporting
hasn't hasn't fit ideologically in the
New York Times mine just happened to
come at at at a moment when it was more
it was more an international issue or a
Washington issue there was more
emotional attachment to it and I quit
I just done too many things in my life
and I'd always loved what I was doing
and I never I didn't I finally didn't
feel that way anymore and so I just quit
now there was life after the New York
Times they'll be life after the New
Yorker yes my name is Betty Brannon hang
I write for a Panamanian newspaper by
the name of la Potenza and I have a
comment and a question
the comment is that just as you've
pointed out that the Prada mint these
situations is that reporting gets
chilled I'd like to add that the problem
is also that many stories get killed in
the case of Panama for example in the
early 80s and mid 80s the Reagan
administration State Department had
decided the Panama was a democracy and
even though there were many people and
it was no secret that Panama was in fact
a military kleptocracy this story could
not get into the American media until
Seymour Hersh broke it on the front page
of the New York Times in 1986 but as
things turned out the Ambassador now in
Panama is Dean Hinton so my question is
do you have anything more that you'd
like to say about mr. Hinton's
participation in that cover-up uh I mean
the record no no I really don't I mean
the record the record speaks for itself
I mean Hinton just just as it was
reported I mean I was just reading that
from the Washington the most recent in
Washington Post story about the
mistletoe massacre I've even forgot that
he had said that at the time
no Hinton was down there he went down
there and said you know I'm not gonna
criticize anybody publicly for anything
ie quiet diplomacy well quiet diplomacy
was a was a message to the Salvadoran
military that they could continue with
their usual ways didn't work why our
diplomacy usually doesn't work not with
now with dictators and thugs yes my name
is Larry Gerwin my question actually is
similar to what the last person said but
but in a broader sense it bothers me
that that people are not held
accountable by the press for their their
lies you mentioned before Thomas Enders
he had he had a paper trail in Cambodia
and it's amazing that it took schanberg
to write about it lots of people knew
this Hinton apparently his career never
suffered from this can you comment on
why the the press if you have any
thoughts on this why the press fails to
hold people accountable for what they've
done over the years does everything go
down in memory hole yes frankly but I'm
not sure but but I'm not sure it's the
printing accountable I mean the
accountability is supposed to be in the
Congress or at least they pointed out
and a lot of times this evidence is out
there the the material is there I mean
the taketake a Salvadoran certification
I mean year after year every six months
I think they had to certify the progress
was being made on human rights the the
Congress kept kept funding El Salvador
kept funding the military and kept
saying one more time you know this is
the last time and and we're not gonna no
more money well they kept you know that
was several and a half billion dollars
ago and they kept funding it
when they got caught over and over again
with the Contras I mean the when Hassan
passes place went down you know when the
when the mining of the harbor Zimmern
the mining the harbors Moynihan's you
know I think he said I'm pissed off I
think it was exactly what he said but he
did he resigned from the committee no
and Moynihan is held in high regard and
in many regards justifiably so
I think there there has been a lapse on
the press people the and on Hinton to in
some ways I mean every time you see
anything written about Hinton or not
every time but often when you see
something written about Hinton you see a
reference to his speech he gave one
tough speech in El Salvador in which he
said you know the work of the right-wing
death squads has to stop it was a tough
speech but what made a newsworthy and
important was it was because of the year
or two years or three years that he'd
been there preceding he hadn't you know
yeah he hadn't criticized the Salvadoran
government yeah I mean I you know
accountability things shouldn't go down
a memory hole but that's that's the way
we journalists are I don't think there
is a great deal of looking back there's
not enough reliance on documents that
are at available at a place like the
National Security Archive and elsewhere
whether it's because journalists don't
have time and they're writing daily
stories no thank you
mm oftentimes ideology and and
responsible reporting our terms not to
go together and you talk a lot about
ideology today I wonder if you could
tell me what's ideology does mean to you
and how it does affect reporting and how
important it is to the reporting
reporting process rather I mean you're
gonna be more specific I mean do you
mean biases
I guess biases would be other another
term for it yeah objectivity is that I
mean you think you know we lose our
objectivity I think your experience but
I don't think I hadn't I didn't have any
ideology that I was trying to give vent
to when I was down there I don't see how
anybody could have been down there
seeing what I was seeing at the time and
wouldn't have written the same thing and
I think every other reporter who was
down there was writing the same thing
unfortunately there weren't enough
reporters down there at certain times I
think the question was asked in
reference to your you're discussing in
new york times little t big t yeah well
listen I still think and I really
believe this I think the New York Times
is the greatest newspaper in the world
but it's not a flawless institution it's
not a flawless institution and I and I
think sometimes I mean the press maybe
sometimes engages in too much
navel-gazing but I also think it's
sometimes we don't examine ourselves
enough and we're not critical enough of
mistakes that are made and there is a
reluctance to to be critical the only
one who really does it and I think it
gets whoever that is you know what the
David Shaw at the LA Times but I don't
you know I don't
I don't think it yeah I mean I don't
think there was any big conspiracy at
the New York Times it was just it was
just it wasn't just year since listen
all I ask on what happened to her at the
Washington Post you know a bright wing
official of the administration wrote a
letter to The Washington Post saying
almond written for a communist newspaper
almond written in Mexico City
not only is Mexican by birth but you
know she's never written for any
newspaper in Mexico City but the editor
a very very very senior editor at the
Newton post came out of his office and
said have you written for this communist
newspaper in Mexico City
and then they wrote back to this
administration officials saying you know
she hasn't written for this in spare
gonna keep we're gonna watch her you
know we don't we're gonna we're gonna
monitor her you know it wasn't it wasn't
in any way the the late the 1950s but I
tell you something it was a lot of
ideologies floating around this town in
80 81 and 80 or 81 in 82 and 83 over
Central America I'm Tina Rosenberg I'm
at the National Security Archive wait
I'd like to get your comment on a
problem that that it seems to me to be a
problem and I think it's something that
might get worse with the Clinton
administration and that is a sort of
social coziness between administration
officials and top editors and reporters
and and one that I'm sure is mirrored
and many cities and whether you would
suggest to newspapers certain kinds of
rules regarding not not regarding
situations that are not sort of straight
interviews but other kinds of contacts
between people they're covering and the
reporters themselves and also whether
you think that because there are an
awful lot of reporters who in some ways
feel an affinity with the Clinton
administration whether that could be a
problem that will worsen now instead of
getting better
I'm not gonna suggest who rules to
newspapers no I agree with you Tina I
mean I I I say somewhat flippantly but
in shorthand where there's two schools
of journalism and either get close to
the sources and socialize with them I
mean I sometimes say there's the Bob
Woodward school on the side her school I
mean I happen to be in the cypher school
but maybe because I don't have the
social graces it takes to socialize with
these people but I can't I mean this
isn't personal thing I can't write tough
things about people I social I just
can't do it you know some people can I
mean I said that to somebody recently a
friend of mine who's good close friend
who was going into the Clinton
administration and I said no I'm not
sure I'm gonna see you much anymore and
and I just want you understand why and
he said well you know what kind of an
attitude is that howdy how do you think
you're gonna get information you know
we're gonna be this you know know what
he was right I mean there isn't there
isn't a part of that where it is a way
to get information I think you have to
do I wouldn't want to suggest any rules
I think as your question suggesting I
think there's too much coziness but I'm
reflecting ray Bonners view of
journalism and that let me take
something that's not not only not the
only one but certainly not the right one
that's the way I work it's the way I
have to do it but I think every
journalist has to if you can if you can
socialize with somebody and write tough
stories about him or her more power to
you I can't do it so I just don't I just
don't socialize with something no loss
for me and no loss for them
yeah haven't been in Africa now this
with Somalia aside number one how do you
think the press the US press has covered
Africa in general and what are the
stories now that we're missing well
that's a good one I do have one
suggestion for newspapers I propose that
it's hard for me to be very objective
about coverage of Africa since my wife
is since I'm really not ray Bonner I'm
I'm the husband of Jane Perez who's the
New York Times correspondent in Africa
the story that's being missed in Africa
is the Sudan I mean you are gonna wake
up tomorrow morning with a situation in
Sudan that makes Somalia seem like it
never happened
I can tell you that already probably the
famine is as bad if not worse the
government in Khartoum is in that league
with North Korea you know a few few that
are still left it's a horrendous
situation there is to use the new phrase
ethnic cleansing cleansing in the
southern and western part of the Sudan
you know it's it's a serious problem
we're gonna we're gonna send in troops
that we're gonna have a much worse
situation in Sudan than we've ever had
in Somalia and there and there are
serious security interests at stake
there there was no security interest
none period in Somalia but but that
leads me to the other thing you're not
closing this I think what papers need to
do is expand their foreign staffs I know
all of you who love that because many of
you want to be foreign correspondents
you got to do it we are the world's
policemen now and we may be becoming the
world's missionary after Somalia and we
don't know anything about the world you
know we woke up one morning to find out
the Kuwait we were going to war over
Kuwait I think if you ran a Dateline
check on Kuwait in fact there was a
wonderful talk of the town comment in
The New Yorker the old New Yorker the
first the first
first issue after the invasion the the
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait sent Kuwait
we're going we're preparing to go to war
in Kuwait nobody knew where Kuwait was
we just dispatched troops to Somalia and
how many people had heard about Somalia
perimeter than those who were reading
jane's dispatches in the new york times
close paren but seriously you know where
is it going to be next the New York
Times is no longer the top of the list
with foreign bureaus the LA Times leads
there's a newspaper in Denmark a
regional newspaper in Denmark not even
in Copenhagen that has more foreign
bureaus than any American newspaper full
foreign bureaus how can the networks the
networks have no bureaus in the South
anymore north-south none me nyet dan
Rather and Tom Brokaw and you know all
these crews in in in Somalia I don't
think any of those people had ever even
been in Africa on assignment let alone
in Somalia I think I really believe it
now I've been working on this for a
while I think the networks and now since
we're told that most Americans get their
news from the network's have no bureaus
in the south there's none in Africa
there's none in Latin American there's
not an Asian you know they've got them
and maybe between them they have two or
three bureaus but virtually none how can
we become the world's policemen when we
don't know anything about the world
we're policing that's what newspapers
need to do they really need to beef up
their foreign coverage and that would be
the only suggestion I would have mean hi
I mean us all he said was CQ I wanted to
ask you if you would follow that
question up with what stories are we
missing in Latin America same story
we've been missing a Latin American for
as long as I was ever down there and
that's Guatemala
don't ask me why I mean I used to say
ten years ago if you think El Salvador
is the under covered story Guatemala is
the uncovered story don't ask me to
explain why I don't know why that's the
only look I've been in Africa for four
and a half years I haven't really
followed Central America I mean I and
Latin America I think
you know we're covering probably Peru
enough I think enough obviously the
people live in Peru and the STOVL great
they wouldn't think we're covering Peru
enough and he's right the story that
I'll tell you the story that's being
missed the biggest story of all is
Turkey turkey is the only and that and
that's a story can be done in Washington
too we are cutting our reports on turkey
to fit policy and when I say cutting I
mean yes Vietnam type cutting our
reports out of Turkey to fit policy to
not offend Turkey turkey is the only
country that's come out of the Cold War
stronger I don't mean countries to
participate and I mean all of us are
stronger because we don't have the same
military threats I mean as a country as
a as a lever Turkey has more influence
now over the West than it had before
because of its location and then tell
you something the New York Times The
Washington Post the LA Times the
network's everybody ought to have a
bureau in Turkey and you're gonna have
18 months or 24 months but it ought to
be done now and start reporting on it
now until it becomes too late okay I'm
Portsmouth from Denmark Danish
journalist
I just want to let you know that my
colleague from the paper you mentioned
before is sitting behind me so it was a
true story you told but I'm asking the
question that I fully understand the
ideological frontline at that time
you're talking about does it mean that
there were no commercial interest in the
decision on the New York Times at the
time I don't think so I don't I mean I
heard Ralph's speech yesterday and I
used to work for Ralph I did you know I
don't think and I think in in out you
know in regional papers smaller papers
that says you know in smaller places I
think in advertised I don't think
advertisers have one bit of influence
over the New York Times you know I mean
I can't imagine an advertiser getting a
an audience with the publisher of the
New York Times is you know read Irvine
from accuracy and media you know you
used to get an audience with with the
publisher of the New York Times and The
Washington Post and as far as I know the
Los Angeles Times and elsewhere but no I
don't think advertising it at a place
like the New York Times or The
Washington Post or the LA Times or
Philadelphia Enquirer any of the big
papers I don't I don't think they
exercised any influence I do it'll be
easier if they did I mean that's that's
easy to grapple with it's but I think
it's much more ideological if you okay
thank you very much
[Applause]
thank you that concludes today's
luncheon